18 June 2009Cabinet held its ordinary meeting in Cape Town yesterday, 17 June 2009. Government congratulates Bafana Bafana for their excellent performance against New Zealand last night and wishes them well in their next match against Spain. We call on South Africans to support the national team by attending all the matches in large numbers. The opportunity to host the world stars in a tournament such as the Confederations Cup and the 2010 FIFA World Cup in your own country comes once in a lifetime and South Africans cannot afford to let this opportunity pass them by. Let s give our youth, who are the future stars of Bafana Bafana, the opportunity to attend the matches. Cabinet noted and welcomed the start of the 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup which kicked off on Sunday, the 14 June 2009 in Johannesburg. The meeting welcomed FIFA President Sepp Blatter s positive messages about the successful start of the tournament and his confidence about South Africa s ability to stage the event which is the precursor to the 2010 FIFA World Cup. The meeting commended the Local Organising Committee for organising what is already proving to be a successful tournament. Cabinet is confident that the 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup Tournament will demonstrate our readiness to host and make the 2010 FIFA World Cup tournament the most memorable world cup ever. The meeting noted that the World Economic Forum on Africa held in Cape Town on 10 12 June 2009 was a success. This Forum created a valuable platform for political, business, labour and community leaders on the continent to discuss the impact of the global economic meltdown on the economies of the developing world. Whilst the discussions ranged from the energy challenges to job losses, Africa was tipped to benefit from the investments that would come with the hosting of the 2010 FIFA World Cup. South Africa s interaction with other world leaders will continue with President Jacob Zuma s participation in the forthcoming multi-lateral fora such as the African Union Summit scheduled for 1-3 July in Libya; the G8 Summit that is taking place from 4-8 July in Italy; and the resumption of the World Trade Organisation (WTO) next round of negotiations. The meeting also noted that the Deputy President, Mr Kgalema Motlanthe led a South African delegation to the International Labour Organisation Conference which was held in Geneva. Cabinet noted that at this gathering, South Africa s response to the global economic meltdown, particularly the partnership between government, business, labour and community organisations to develop a joint response, received positive responses from the participants at the meeting as an example on how other countries could handle difficult challenges. Cabinet welcomed the launch of the National Youth Development Agency (NYDA) as part of the celebration of 2009 Youth Development Month. This Agency will direct the work of government and social partners in the pursuit of the goal of developing our youth. The agency must move with speed to develop and share its plans and programmes on how to address the challenges facing young people in our country. Cabinet paid tribute to and expressed its condolences to the family and friends of Judge Patrick Maqubela who recently passed away. Judge Maqubela was a highly respected member of the judiciary with a rich history of involvement in the struggle against the injustices of apartheid. A service to the nation that saw him serve many years in prison for his political activities. His contribution to the transformation of the judiciary and the achievement of justice for all South Africans will be sorely missed. The decisions of the Cabinet Lekgotla (Extended Cabinet Meeting) which was held on 26-28 May were approved. A progress report on the implementation of the new structure of government was noted. The report on the 2009-2010 Budget process, including measures to create Budget Votes to allow funds to be allocated to the newly established Ministries was presented and noted. National Treasury will table technical amendments to the Appropriation Bill to Parliament to create the new votes and to amend the names of some of the current budget votes. Mr Nimrod Zalk was appointed to the post Deputy Director General in charge of Industrial development in the Department of Trade and Industry. Enquiries: Themba Maseko (Government Spokesperson) Cell: 083 645 0810 Issued by: Government Communications (GCIS)top