4 March 2009Cabinet held its ordinary meeting in Pretoria this morning, 4 March 2009. Cabinet condemns the attack on the Sri Lankan cricket team in Lahore, Pakistan. No objective, political or otherwise, could ever justify the barbaric attack on innocent sportspeople who were in Pakistan to represent their country and its people. This government rejects, in no uncertain terms, the targeting of sports teams as they serve the important role of being ambassadors for all sports loving citizens of the world. The meeting received a report on the aid that was provided to Zimbabwe in terms of the Southern African Development Community (SADC) Zimbabwean Humanitarian Development Assistance Framework. This framework was put in place following the visit to Zimbabwe by an interdepartmental task team that was led by Reverend Chikane. This framework provided for the establishment of multi-stakeholder structures to ensure that the aid was provided in a non-partisan way. The stakeholders represented in the structures included United Nations (UN) agencies, government representatives, religious community, farmers unions and SADC. These structures were monitored by and reported to the SADC ambassadors. Cabinet was pleased to note that all reports indicated that the aid was distributed in full compliance of the SADC framework. An interdepartmental task team that visited Zimbabwe over the past two weeks has also found that there was compliance with the SADC framework. We are therefore satisfied that the South African aid was received by the targeted ordinary Zimbabweans. The meeting noted that some media reports appeared to be confusing the SADC aid and the aid that was provided to farmers by the Zimbabwean government. The meeting welcomed the positive news that the sale of tickets for the 2010 FIFA World Cup was proceeding well. However, Cabinet shares the concern that South Africans were not purchasing the tickets. Extra measures will have to be put in place jointly with the Local Organising Committee (LOC) to ensure that the Confederations Cup and the World Cup finals are marketed to South Africans. The report on the establishment of the Education Evaluation and Development Unit in the Department of Education was received and noted. The report will be published for public comment before the matter is finalised. The Inter-governmental protocol for the provision of support to the Eastern Cape Department of Education was approved. This protocol will provide the legal basis for the National Department of Education to provide technical and administrative support to the provincial department of education, including clarification of roles and responsibilities between the two departments. The meeting noted that the 13th Awards ceremony for the National Orders will take place on 27th March 2009 at the Union Buildings in Pretoria. The following appointments were approved: Enquiries Themba Maseko (Government Spokesperson) Cell: 083 645 0810 Issued by: Government Communications (GCIS)top