4 May 2009The 2009 Presidential Inauguration will take place on the 9 May 2009 at the Union Buildings in Pretoria. Media arrangements have been made to allow media to effectively cover the event within the space constraints.Only accredited media representatives will be able to cover the 2009 Presidential Inauguration. Accreditation demand is high and all media organisations are therefore requested to submit their accreditation details based on requirements released by Government Communications (GCIS).The Accreditation Centre will be situated at the Pretoria Art Gallery on Schoeman Street, Pretoria.Media accreditation will permit access to cover the event and Media Centre located at the Southern Lawns of the Union Buildings, Pretoria. Media representatives will not be permitted to access any media facilities or access to the event without accreditation.The Accreditation Centre will be open for media accreditation from Tuesday, 5 May 2009 at 13h00 until Thursday, 7 May 2009 at 18:00.All members of the media who have submitted their details for accreditation should bring their Press Cards, Identity Document or Passport to be accredited.The media facilities and services for the 2009 Presidential Inauguration are designed to provide the best possible working conditions for accredited media representatives who are covering the event.BroadcastThe Amphitheatre of the Union Buildings is the main venue for the event. The Host Broadcaster has been granted exclusive access to the event and will provide both clean sound and video feeds for all broadcasters covering the event. The feeds will be available at the media centre and at the live stand up positions located at the Southern Lawns. All broadcasters except for the Host Broadcaster will be based at the Southern Lawns. The Host Broadcaster will also cover the airport arrivals.PhotographyA photography pool has been arranged comprising of Media Agencies and Media Groups. The pool pictures will be available to all photographers via email and in the Media Centre at the Southern Lawns.The pools have been arranged as follows;Union Buildings amphitheatre Pavement and southern lawn route Airport arrivals ScribesThe scribes/ journalists will be accommodated on the balcony of the amphitheatre without their cameras. This includes radio stations broadcasting the event live.The Media Centre will have all the core facilities needed for media reporting on the Inauguration. The Centre will be at the Southern lawns of the Union Buildings, Pretoria.The Media Centre will be run by the SA Government Media Team, staffed with specialist media practitioners including media and event professionals.The media workspaces will have the following:Members of the media are advised to bring their laptops and internet connections as the connections are limited.The Media Centre will operate on Saturday, 9 May 2009 at 05h00 until the close of proceedings at 17h00.Media statements and speeches delivered will be distributed at the Media Centre by SA Government Media Team.Media representatives are responsible for their own accommodation arrangements. Media can make arrangements at hotels around Pretoria and Johannesburg.Johannesburg International Airport (JIA) is considered the port of entry for all international arrivals.Members of the media are advised to arrange their own transport for the Inauguration. Car rentals are available at the airport.Media is advised to park at Ritondale Sports Field on Saturday, 9 May 2009, where they will be shuttled to the Union Buildings and later taken back to their cars. The shuttle service will be available when proceedings end. All media are requested to arrive at 05h00 on Saturday morning.Tshegofatso Modubu Cell: 083 276 0786Harold Maloka Cell: 082 847 9799Thabo Masebe 082 410 8087Issued by: Government Communications (GCIS)top