20 May 2009The new Cabinet held its first ordinary meeting in Cape Town today, 20 May 2009. The President welcomed all members of Cabinet and paid tribute to the previous Cabinet for the work during its term of office. This work had laid a firm foundation for development and growth and had made it possible for the new Cabinet to hit the ground running in executing the new mandate. He also took the opportunity to welcome all the new members of Cabinet. He urged members to take their responsibility seriously by working hard and to conduct themselves in a manner befitting their office. Cabinet welcomed the success by National Treasury to raise $1.5 billion in the International markets through the sale of bonds. This amount is $500 million more than what National Treasury intended to raise due to the high demand for the bonds at a favourable rate. The bonds were sold in the United States, Europe and Asia. This represents a resounding vote of confidence in our country and our economic policies. The primary purpose of the meeting was to prepare for the Cabinet Lekgotla, which is scheduled to take place from 26 to 28 May 2009. The Lekgotla will deal with three key issues namely, the adoption of the new Medium Term Strategic Framework (MTSF), which will be informed by the new electoral mandate; to provide the new administration with an opportunity to reflect on and plan for the implementation of the government's Programme of Action for the period leading to the next Cabinet Lekgotla in January 2010; and lastly, to reflect on the modalities and structures for the National Strategic planning function and the structural changes in the executive and government. Cabinet noted and the progress and the challenges in implementing the new structure of government. The proposal on the setting up Cabinet committees and clusters was approved. The following clusters have been established with members in brackets: The clusters began their first working sessions today. The meeting noted that the World Economic Forum s Africa Forum is scheduled to take place in Cape Town from 10 to 12 June 2009. The Forum will be attended by a number of dignitaries including Heads of State and leaders from the rest of the continent. Africa Day will be celebrated across the continent and in the Diaspora. We call on South Africans to celebrate this important day. Enquiries Themba Maseko (Government Spokesperson) Cell: 083 645 0810 Issued by: Government Communications (GCIS)top